Human Breathprints as Biometric Identifiers:
Assessing Uniqueness and Reliability
Michael McCallion
MSc Artificial Intelligence
Ulster University
Belfast, Northern Ireland
mccallion-m15@ulster.ac.uk
Abstract— Breathprint analysis is emerging as a promising range. When it comes to the actual collection of breath spectral
non-invasive biometric identifier, with definite potential to data from an individual, collecting a ‘breathprint’ is
compete with more traditional methods like fingerprint considered much less invasive than the likes of collecting a
scanning and facial recognition. In this study, two hybrid fingerprint or a retinal scanner. The individual or patient must
machine learning models were developed to evaluate the simply exhale into a sensor. Whereas for both fingerprints and
effectiveness of a human ‘breathprints’ ability to uniquely retinal scans, the subject must remain within close proximity
identify patients, through utilising a dataset of Volatile Organic to a device, which can cause discomfort for certain patients.
Compounds (VOC’s) collected from patients’ breath samples.
The first model employed dimensionality reduction through The ‘breathprint’ can also be used for monitoring
implementing Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Linear metabolic conditions as well as being used for the early
Discriminant Analysis (LDA), before applying regression-based detection of diseases. In this paper [3], it is proven that volatile
feature selection algorithms called Lasso, Ridge and ElasticNet. organic compounds contain specific biomarkers that can be
The second model altered this approach slightly by applying the indicative towards specific diseases, like diabetes and
regression techniques used for feature selection prior to LDA. hyperglycemia. We also see in [4], that VOC’s “can hold the
Both models then had their performance assessed using key for detecting early metabolic pathway changes in
classifier techniques including Logistic Regression, Support
carcinogenesis”. These papers evidence that not only is this
Vector Machine (SVM) and Random Forest. Analysis
method of non-invasive biometric collection useful for patient
demonstrated that altering the sequence of feature selection and
identification, but it also possesses numerous other
dimensionality reduction can significantly impact classification
advantages. Paper [5] documents that VOCs found in the
accuracy. These results suggest that while breathprints have
breath, can be indicative of certain metabolic and pathological
considerable potential as a biometric identifier, refining the
changes in the body.
analytical approach is key for optimizing classification
outcomes. Further work is needed to fully harness the Although the research surrounding the human breathprint
capabilities of breathprint analysis for reliable and accurate in relation to uniquely identifying subjects is promising, there
identification of individuals.
is a disconnect in research regarding how reliable the bio-
identifier is. This project aims to try to bridge the gap, through
Keywords— Breathprint Analysis, Machine Learning, Volatile
the production of a machine learning classifier model, that can
Organic Compounds (VOCs), Linear Discriminant Analysis
identify a patient or individual through a given test sample,
(LDA), Random Forest
with a relative degree of confidence.
I. INTRODUCTION
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Biometric identification techniques have been at the forefront
of security, medical and personal identification systems for As previously mentioned, biometric idenfitication has been
many years now. Commonly used techniques include of importance for many years now, with the most commonly
fingerprints, retinal scanning and facial recognition. However, used being fingerprint, iris and facial recognition. The use of
in recent years it has become apparent that the need for more exhaled human breath for unique identification is an
non-invasive techniques has increased. An ideal candidate for emerging technique that is just now beginning the gain
this is the use of mass spectrometry of the human breath to traction. The means of collecting the human breathprint is a
identify a unique individual, amongst a group of
non-invasive approach whereby the user exhales into a device
‘breathprints’. A human ‘breathprint’ contains compounds
which then collects the data or Volatile Organic Compounds
known as Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC’s). In 1971,
(VOC’s). These VOC’s vary by individual, depedendent on
Linus Pauling proved that the exhaled human breath contains
their age, sex, diet and health condition. In [6], it is
over 250 substances [1]. With the equipment available to us
today, it is possible to identify over 1000 unique substances in highlighted how VOC’s can provide important insight into
the exhaled breath. These VOC’s can be used to uniquely the current condition of an inidviduals body, and whether or
identify which subject (patient) the breath belongs to. In this not they are at risk of any diseases. Through the same logic,
paper, we utilise data processing, cleaning and wrangling a breath print analysis should be able to be used to identify a
techniques, exploratory data analysis, statistical analysis, data patient uniquely, from a database of existing patients. In a
visualisation as well as various machine learning algorithms paper [7], that studied the volatile compounds that exist in the
(regression and classification models), to develop a hybrid
human breath, they grouped VOC’s into “chemical functional
model capable of successfully identifying an individual
groups (e.g., methylated hydrocarbons or aldehydes; based
simply by running the models developed on their breath or
on known metabolic and enzymatic pathways).” In the same
spectral data. Methods used today, including Gas
paper, they were able to achieve a 93% classification
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) and
Secondary Electrospray Ionisation Mass Spectrometry (SESI- accuracy for cancer within individuals, using a Linear
MS) [2], can measure VOC’s down to a parts per trillion (ppt) Discrimnant Analysis (LDA) and Random Forest classifier
Michael McCallion – B00960854
model. [8] Shows us that VOC’s can be used for their invasive biometric identification method that offers the same
association with numerous diseases. Airway diseases such as (if not better) levels of accuracy and reliability.
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
can be identified within patients whos ‘breathprint’ contains One such example of a non-invasive method for this is the
specific “carbonyl-containing classes (i.e., aldehydes, esters use of human ‘breathprints’ as a biometric identifier. Volatile
and ketones) and hydrocarbons (i.e., alkanes and alkenes).” Organic Compounds (VOC’s) that can be analysed within the
human breath can be the key to proving if exhaled human
Although in the above mentioned paper [8], that VOC’s can
breath could be as uniquely identifiable as the likes of a
identify airway dieases, it was mentioned that although these
fingerprint or iris. It holds the potential to revolutionise
biomarkers do show promise, future work within the area
biometric identification, particularly in the field of digital
should prioritise the clear reporting of accuracy and
health. This project aims to discover whether human
multiariate methods, whilst still working on the classification
‘breathprints’ could provide a reliable, unique and accurate
of these volatile metabolites using machine learning
biometric identifier, comparable to that of fingerprint or
algorithms.
facial recognition.
In [8], we can see that there has been development
In healthcare, the demand for non-invasive
of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), as well as other
monitoring tools is increasing in demand, with breathprint
neural network models (Multilayer Perceptron and Recurrent
analysis offering a means to seamlessly identify patients
Neural Network), that produced an overall accuracy of 97.8%
whilst providing valuable observations on their health status.
in distinguishing healthy patients from patients that possess
Granted that ‘breathprints’ could successfully be discovered
lung cancer. [9] This paper found that carcinogenic VOCs
to be as powerful as fingerprints, they could be used in
exist and there is a relationship between benzene and
applications such as a secure and safe way to identify patients
formaldehyde being present in exhaled breath linking to
and gain access to their medical records. More importantly,
forms of cancer, including lung and prostate.
before it is adopted as a tool for identification, we must
Recently, the use machine learning (ML) algorithms
address the fundamental question of their uniqueness and
within the field of biometrics have been increasing in
reliability.
popularity. These ML techniques focus primarily on pattern
Three of the main challenges in this project are deemed
recognition, classification and prediction. One of the reasons
to be:
ML has become integral to the field of biometrics is due to
1. Data Variability – Datasets containing varying
the algorithms’ ability to handle datasets that are high-
VOC values in the form of continuous variables
dimensional and complex. In [10], the study delves into and
poses the issue of the inherent variability within the
discusses the various ML strategies for improving
dataset. The VOC’s present within a human breath
recognition rates and accuracy in complex datasets. This
constantly fluctuate and change throughout their
pattern recognition can be applied to human breath print
lifetime. Dependent on several factors including
analysis, as the machine learning algorithms can detect
age, diet, health conditions and exposure to certain
miniscule variations in VOCs, which can be used for
environments. Naturally, the variability of such
differentiation between patients, in turn allowing the patient
data elicits questions relating to the stability and
to be identified amongst others. These AI models can also
uniqueness of breathprints over time. The overall
easily classify biometric data into classes or categories. Using
question remains – can a breathprint consistently
an example related to this paper, classifying exhaled breath
identify a subject or will the variations within the
data to a specific patient or individual. This is one of the most
data undermine the reliability of the tool.
important factors when it comes to developing the non-
2. Small Sample Sizes – An additional challenge is
invasive technique of breath analysis further. As the machine
how widely available large, labelled datasets are,
learning model learns from the data which it has been trained
that capture the entire range of breathprint
on, it develops establishes an ability to make accurate and
variability. As it is seen as a new field of study,
specific predictions. Through the analysis of specific trends
with most research occurring in the last 4 years,
and relationships within the ‘breathprint’ data, the model can
there is a lack of extensive datasets containing
detect potential health issues during the early stages. Here
exhaled breath information. The use of small
[11], we can see a study that explored the use of machine
datasets and in turn, small training and test sets
learning algorithms to develop a biometric system based on
applied to machine learning models, can result in
exhaled breath from a human. The system developed utilised
overfitting. This means that the models perform
ML models to authenticate users, achieving high accuracy
well on training data, but fail to perform as well on
rates in confirming these users. Further reviews on the
new, unseen data when the models have been
literature surrounding this area can be found in the
deployed.
supplementary materials.
3. Overfitting & Model Complexity – As breathprint
III. PROBLEM SCENARIO data is extremely complex, machine learning
models are used to analyse the data and then
In the area of biometrics, fingerprint scanning has often been
classify it accurately. Again, due to the complex
perceived as the best available option to subjects or
nature of the data, the models can be at risk of
individuals due to how reliable and secure of a method it is.
overfitting. To mitigate the risk, cross-validation,
However, as the requirements for healthcare technology
regularization and data augmentation techniques
evolves within the field of digital health, there is a high
are utilised.
demand for the development and implementation of a non-
Breathprint analysis is said to still be in its exploratory phase. to identify the VOCs. Further details of the data collection
The majority of studies are limited by small sample sizes with including ethical considerations are documented in the
high data variability. original study [2].
The primary objective of this project is to determine
B. Data Splitting
whether human ‘breathprint’ can be as uniquely identifiable
as human fingerprints. More specifically, the study aims to: The dataset was divided into two subsets:
• Training set – This comprised of 80% of the original
1. Assess uniqueness – Investigate uniqueness of dataset.
‘breathprints’ by analysing the variability of VOC’s • Test set – This comprised of 20% of the original
patterns including their inter-individual and intra- dataset.
individual relationships. This train-test split allowed for the machine learning models
2. Mitigate data variability – Apply robust and to be trained on one subset of data (training set) and then to
effective pre-processing techniques to normalise best tested on a completely separate, unseen dataset (test set),
breathprint data. to evaluate the model’s performance and thus providing
3. Address small sample sizes – Use cross-validation evaluation metrics.
and data augmentation to improve the
C. Scaling the Data
generalisability of the models, despite the
As a result of the varying scales of VOC’s, it was crucial to
challenges posed by limited datasets.
standardise the dataset before proceeding with
4. Prevent overfitting – Implement regularisation
dimensionality reduction. To achieve this, the
methods and validate model performance.
‘StandardScaler()’ function was used to transform the data.
5. Evaluate classifier models – Implement
This meant each feature within the dataset had a mean value
classification models and provide an evaluation for
of zero, with a standard deviation of one. This means that all
each model through understanding their accuracy,
features contribute equally to the analysis, especially when
precision, recall and f1-score metrics.
working with sensitive techniques like PCA and LDA. This
process was key in preparing the data for later steps in the
Determining if breathprints can be utilised as a unique
analysis. Scaling helped to reduce the impact of outliers and
biometric identifier, comparable to fingerprints, is crucial for
ensured the data remained on a consistent scale. It helped
advancing the field of non-invasive biometric identification.
make sure that the variability found within the dataset was
If successful, the research could be the steppingstones for
due to unseen patterns within the data and not differences in
breathprint to be used in several different applications (e.g.,
the scale of features.
secure patient identification in healthcare). By addressing the
challenges of data variability, small sample sizes and model D. Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
overfitting, this project aims to provide an analysis of the
Moreover, the next stage in the process was to apply Principal
human breathprints’ potential as a biometric tool.
Component Analysis (PCA) to the statistically significant
IV. METHODOLOGY features that had been extracted through the previous stages
mentioned. The purpose of this was to further reduce the size
The following section outlines the methodological approach
of the dataset whilst retaining a specific degree of variance.
that was planned to be used to analyse breathprint data for
In this study, 99.99% of variance was retained whilst
biometric identification. The process will involve multiple
performing PCA. PCA is known as a linear dimensionality
techniques for statistical analysis as well as for machine
reduction technique. The goal of applying PCA is to
learning. These include Kruskal-Wallis testing, Bonferroni
transform the data into a set of principal components [20].
correction, Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The
These new principal components (PC’s) are ranked by the
machine learning models implemented regression algorithms
amount of variance which they explain. The cumulative value
called Ridge, Lasso and ElasticNet for feature selection.
of the variance of all principal components will come to a
Models known as Logistic Regression, Support Vector
total of 99.99%.
Machines (SVM) and Random Forests were used for
As PCA was applied whilst retaining 99.99%, it assured
classifying the test data after the models have been trained.
that the most important features remained whilst eliminating
The overall goal, as previously mentioned, is to identify the
any redundant or noisy data that remained [19]. As the dataset
most important features from the dataset and then classify the
has now been greatly reduced, it reduces the computational
test VOC samples to a specific individual or patient.
resources required for machine learning models and helps
A. Data Collection eliminate the threat of these models’ overfitting. Before the
PCA was applied, a standard scaler was used in order to
The dataset used was generously provided by Martinez-
standardise the data. This is due to PCA being sensitive
Lozano Sinues, P. et al. [2], the authors of study performed in
towards the scale of variables within the dataset [20]. A
Switzerland. They have granted permission for this to be used
variance retention of 99.99% allowed for the maintenance of
in the study. The original study involved eleven subject (6
the majority of information from the original dataset, whilst
males, 5 females) with a heterogeneous ethnic background.
effectively reducing the dimensionality of the dataset.
Over nine days, breath samples were collected at specific
times. Food and drink intake were controlled prior to E. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
measurements being taken. Breath samples were analysed
In the 1st iteration of the model, Linear Discriminant Analysis
using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Q-
was applied after PCA, prior to the feature selection
TOF), employing a secondary electrospray ionisation (SESI)
regression algorithms being implemented. In the 2nd iteration,
LDA was applied after the feature selection process. The goal
of LDA is to maximise separability between classes
(patients). LDA is a supervised technique that finds linear
combinations of features which best separate classes [21].
Through doing so, LDA was able to isolate the most Figure 3 - ElasticNet Regression Formula [31]
discriminative features within the dataset.
G. Classification Models
The application of LDA produced a refined dataset which
contained the most relevant components for classification. Logistic Regression
Through reducing the features to only those that were most Logistic regression was applied to classify the VOC test
statistically significant discriminants, LDA enhanced the samples. This model predicts the probability of a binary
classifier model’s ability to successfully identify patients. outcome [26]. This model’s purpose was to provide a baseline
This step allowed for the final analysis to focus on features comparison against other more complex models employed.
which possessed the most significant biomarkers for patient Although this model is seen as a basic or simple technique, it
identification. was found to be a useful tool in this study.
Random Forest
F. Feature Selection using Regression models
This model was also implemented to classify the VOC test
Lasso Regression samples. It is known as an ensemble learning method [27]
One of the regression algorithms implemented for feature that constructs several decision trees, then merging them to
selection is known as Lasso (Least Absolute Shrinkage produce a single, accurate and stable prediction. Random
Operator). This linear regression technique possesses an L1 forest is extremely effective at handling highly dimensional
regularisation penalty. This penalty shrinks a number of the data. It averages the prediction values of multiple decision
models less important coefficients to zero [22]. This trees and in turn reduces variance whilst improving
technique was particularly useful within this project as it generalisation.
helped to identify the most relevant VOC’s by eliminating Support Vector Machines (SVM)
features with little or no contribution to the model. As Lasso This model works by finding the optimal hyperplane that
selects a specific subset of features, it improves the separates data into different classes [27], maximizing the
interpretability of the model. margin between closest points of different classes (i.e.,
support vectors). The SVM’s models’ ability to deal with
non-linear relationships made it a strong choice for
‘breathprint’ classifiers.
H. Model Evaluation & Validation
10-fold cross validation was performed on the training data
Figure 1 - Lasso Regression Formula [29] to ensure robustness and generalisability of models. This
process involves splitting the data into 10 subsets, with the
Ridge Regression
model being trained on 9 of them and then validated on the
A second linear regression method known as Ridge
final remaining subset. This process is iterated 10 times in
regression was applied. This model uses an L2 regularisation
total, with each subset serving as the validation set once. This
penalty, which discourages large coefficients, but does not
cross-validation technique was pivotal in preventing
shrink them to zero (like Lasso does) [23]. Ridge regression
overfitting and ensuring consistent model performance. The
is used to determine whether regularisation without sparsity
results from each fold were averaged, providing a more
would return a more valuable feature selection. Ridge keeps
accurate and reliable estimate of the model’s accuracy.
all features. However, it penalises its coefficients so to reduce
Performance Metrics
multicollinearity and improve model generalisation [24].
Model performance was evaluated using accuracy, precision,
recall and f1-score metrics. The metrics provided a
comprehensive assessment of the models’ ability to correctly
classify VOC samples and assign them to the correct subject.
Results addressed in next section.
V. RESULTS
The first approach to analyse the dataset was implementing a
hybrid model which utilised regression and classification
Figure 2 - Ridge Regression Formula [30]
machine learning algorithms, after dimensionality reduction
techniques had been performed. Firstly, scaling of the data
ElasticNet Regression
took place using a StandardScaler so that each feature within
The ElasticNet regression model combines L1 and L2
the dataset contributed equally to the data analysis. PCA was
regularisation to cater towards a more balanced approach to
applied to the scaled data, with a variance retention of 95%.
feature selection [25]. The use of ElasticNet was crucial in
The number of features was reduced significantly with the
this project as it allowed for a compromise between the
PCA train set shape being “154, 13” and the PCA test set
techniques used in both Lasso and Ridge. ElasticNet is found
shape being “39, 13”. In total, the 193 patients’ samples were
to be effective when the dataset contains highly correlated
reduced to a total of 13 principal components. This is a
features and ensuring relevant features were selected whilst
penalizing less significant features.
significant reduction that still encapsulates the vast majority 3. Random Forest
(95%) of original variance.
Next, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) was The performance of each model along with their evaluation
applied to the previously transformed PCA dataset. This metrics can be seen in the table below:
supervised dimensionality reduction technique aims to Classification Methods Evaluation Metrics (1st Iteration)
maximise the separation between classes. The Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-score
Names
implementation of LDA further reduced the dataset to 193,
Logistic 25.64 28.61 25.64 24.46
10. Meaning that the LDA algorithm identified 10 Regression
discriminant components to be the most significant in SVM 30.77 40.72 30.77 33.03
distinguishing between classes in the dataset. Note, that all Random 33.33 32.46 33.33 32.01
Forest
discriminant components were retained to preserve full
Table 3 - Evaluation Metrics for Classifier Models (1st Iteration)
discriminatory power of the model.
Three regression models were employed: Lasso,
The logistic regression model achieved sub- standard results,
Ridge & ElasticNet. Each model applied a penalty to less
demonstrating low scores across all metrics. An accuracy of
relevant features and in turn enhanced the model’s
25.64% shows that the model incorrectly classified the vast
interpretability and reduced the chances of overfitting.
majority of test samples.
The performance of each regression model was evaluated on
The SVM model outperformed that of the Logistic
their R2 score. R2 score indicates the proportion of variance in
Regression model, achieving both a higher accuracy and
the dependent variable that is predictable from the
precision (30.77% accuracy and 40.72% precision). The
independent variables [28]. The R2 scores for each were as
increase in the f1-score (33.03%) evidences a greater balance
follows:
between precision and recall. This implies that SVM
experienced a greater success at distinguishing between
R2 scores of Regression Models (1st Iteration)
classes (patients).
Regression Model R2 Score
The Random Forest model achieved the highest
Lasso -0.0195
Ridge -0.0106 accuracy of 35.90%. This model achieved an f1-score of
ElasticNet 0.0016 33.15%, like that of the SVM model. The performance of this
Table 1 - R^2 scores for Regression Models random forest model shows that it was the best suited to
handling the complexity of the VOC data, meaning it is the
As seen above, the ElasticNet model was the best performer.
most promising classifier of these tested.
Although, the R2 value for each of the models are low,
The second model iterated was slightly different
meaning they all struggled to explain the variance in the
from the first model. In this model, Principal Component
dataset.
Analysis (PCA) is not used. The regression algorithms for
feature selection are run first, then Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA) is applied to the selected features. The aim
of this was to refine the feature selection process and then
transform the dataset into discriminant components by
utilising the dimensionality reduction technique. The results
from this model can be found following.
As per the previous model, the dataset was scaled
before undergoing feature selection. Each model had the
Figure 4 - Else-if statement used to automatically select best model same randomized search hyperparameters as in the first
iteration. The R2 score for each can be found below:
An else-if statement (figure 1) was then implemented which R2 scores of Regression Models (2nd Iteration)
chose the highest performing model based on which had the Regression Model R2 Score
highest R2 score. The parameters of the best performing Lasso -0.7125
Ridge -0.0171
ElasticNet model along with the other two Lasso and Ridge
ElasticNet -0.8987
models, including their optimal hyperparameters used can be
Table 4 - R^2 scores for Regression Models (2nd Iteration)
seen following:
Although all R2 scores are negative, the Ridge regression
Optimal Models for Feature Selection (1st Iteration) model was the best performer. Although this score is not
Model Names Alpha value L1_ratio R2 score ideal, it was significantly better than that of the Lasso and
Lasso 0.3449 N/A 0.0195
ElasticNet regression models. These negative values once
Ridge 9.8699 N/A 0.1056
ElasticNet 0.8859 0.1960 0.0016 again suggest that all three models struggled to explain
Table 2 - Regression models and their optimised parameters (1st variance in the dataset adequately.
Iteration) The same else-if statement (figure 1) was used to
automatically determine the best model (based on R2 scores).
Using the selected features from the ElasticNet model, three The models along with its optimal parameters and R2 score
different classification models were applied to classify the can be seen below.
test VOC samples to specific individuals. The 3 models used
were: Optimal Models for Feature Selection (2nd Iteration)
1. Logistic Regression Model Names Alpha value L1_ratio R2 score
2. Support Vector Machines (SVM’s) Lasso 0.0553 N/A -0.7125
Ridge 0.0553 N/A -0.0171 Contrastingly, each negative coefficient suggests the
ElasticNet 0.0696 0.5107 -0.8987 opposite.
Table 5 - Regression Models and their Optimised Parameters (2nd
The most influential discriminant component was
Iteration)
LDS, capturing a coefficient of 0.6407. This implies that this
specific component captures a great amount of discriminatory
Following feature selection using regression, LDA was then
information. Conversely, LD3 and LD6 contributed
applied to the new dataset to reduce dimensionality. The
negatively, meaning the models may have struggled with
process of LDA transformed the data into 10 linear
classification due to the presence of these features.
discriminants. This reduced the dataset to a shape of 193, 10,
the same as that found in the first iteration, whereby the
VI. DISCUSSION
dataset contained 10 discriminant components in total.
Both iterations of models have displayed insights into how
This proves that the LDA was successful in reducing
effective different approaches to feature selection and
the dataset whilst retaining the discriminatory power required
dimensionality reduction are when classifying the human
for classification. The same 3 models were applied, with the
breathprint data. Through the comparison of the metrics
following table displaying their metrics.
across these models, it is apparent that certain approaches
Classification Methods Evaluation Metrics (2nd Iteration)
impact accuracy and reliability of models.
Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-score In the first iteration of the model, where PCA and
Names LDA were applied first, before the regression models, the
Logistic 56.41 65.81 56.41 55.99 Ridge regression model outperformed Lasso and ElasticNet
Regression
with an R2 score of -0.0106 (table 1). The result shows that
SVM 41.03 61.05 41.03 44.74
Random 38.46 32.46 33.33 32.01 whilst Ridge was somewhat effective the model’s overall
Forest ability to understand the variance of the data was limited.
Table 6 - Evaluation Metrics for Classifier Models (2nd Iteration) Although ElasticNet (which balances L1 and L2
regularisation) demonstrated a positive R2 score of 0.0016
When comparing the Logistic Regression model to the
(table 1) it was not a strong enough of a score to justify using
previous iteration, it has shown significant improvement -
it, given its slightly better score.
across all metrics. Particularly with accuracy, where it has Contrastingly, during the 2nd iteration (where
increased from 25.64% to 56.41%. This shows how regression models were applied before LDA), the R2 values
performing feature selection before LDA and removing PCA
decreased across each of the 3 models used, in particular with
altogether is beneficial. From the results, it is clear that by
Lasso and ElasticNet. Lasso exhibited a score of -0.7125 and
applying the regression models in this fashion, it resulted in
ElasticNet with -0.8987 (Table 4). In this iteration, the Ridge
a significant increase in the model’s ability to classify data. regression model also saw its R2 score drop to -0.0171. One
The SVM model also displayed a noticeable
possible reason for this may be due to reversing the feature
improvement across all metrics, with the two main
selection and dimensionality reduction processes. In doing
improvements being accuracy (increased from 30.77% to
so, it may have resulted in the retention of more noise within
41.03%) and recall (increased from 40.72% to 61.05%). This
the dataset, in turn reducing the effectiveness of the
proves that the SVM model also benefitted from the
regression techniques used for feature selection.
alternative approach. The difference in R2 scores highlight the importance
The Random Forest classifier also demonstrated an
of the sequence in which the aforementioned techniques were
improvement in performance, but to a lesser extent than that
applied. The results show applying both PCA and LDA may
of the latter two models. The accuracy increased from
be a better approach by allowing the regression models to
33.33% to 38.46% and the precision increased from 32.48%
focus on more prominent or important features. This could be
to 54.1%.
because the LDA maximises separability between classes
A table showing feature importance based on the
(patients). Thus, resulting in a better refined dataset for
logistic regression models coefficients can be seen below:
classification.
Feature Importance based on Logistic Regression coefficients (2nd
Among all the models test in the first iteration, the
Iteration)
Linear Discriminant Component Value
Random Forest model achieved the highest accuracy score of
LD5 0.6407 33.33%, with a recall score of 33.33% also. These metrics
LD7 0.2077 would be considered as low, evidencing that the model
LD4 0.1217 struggled to classify the data. This may be due to the
LD9 0.0776
complexity and high dimensionality of the dataset.
LD10 -0.0875
The Logistic Regression model used, which is
LD2 -0.1034
LD8 -0.4617 usually seen as easier to understand and less susceptible to
LD1 -0.5926 overfitting, demonstrated a poor performance in the first
LD6 -0.6388 iteration with an accuracy of 25.54% and an f1-score of
LD3 -0.7191 24.46%. This may be due to Logistic Regression being a
Table 7 - Logistic Regression Coefficients (2nd Iteration)
linear model, meaning it may well have struggled to capture
complexities that exist within the data. However, the 2nd
The positive coefficients indicate that an increase in the
iteration of the model managed to display a significant
corresponding linear discriminant contributes positively to
improvement in the Logistic Regression models
the likelihood of assigning a sample to a particular class.
performance. In this iteration, the modes performance
increased to 56.41%, with its f1-score increasing to 55.99%
(Table 6). This shows that by applying feature selection first, VII. CONCLUSION
then LDA after, it helped to boost the Logistic Regressions
This subsection of the study aimed to test the feasibility of
scores by reducing the dataset to its most predictive features.
breathprint analysis as a non-invasive biometric identifier,
The Random Forest model also displayed a slight
with an emphasis on the application of machine learning
improvement from the first iteration to the second iteration,
methodologies for feature selection and classification. Two
with the accuracy score increasing from 33.33% to 38.46%.
hybrid models allowed deep insights into the optimal
This again implies that the Random Forest model performs
sequencing of the dimensionality reduction and feature
better on a dataset which was reduced using feature selection
selection process. The first one, applying PCA and LDA
first, then the classes were maximally separated using LDA.
before feature selection, provided modest classification
Moreover, the SVM models performance increased
accuracy, especially with the case of Random Forests. The
from 1st iteration to 2nd iteration, with accuracy and prediction
2nd model reversed this process, conducting feature selection
scores increasing to 41.03% (from 30.77%) and 66.05%
for LDA, and performance of all three models was enhanced.
(from 40.72%) respectively.
The present study gave some evidence that methodological
Table 7 displays feature importance based on Linear
sequencing would help in improving the discriminating
Regression coefficients. It provides insights into which linear
power of VOC patterns; on the other hand, the enhancements
discriminants were the most influential in the classification
indicate problems in the classification of high-dimensional
task. ‘LD5’ had the highest positive impact (a value of
and complex data. Future work should consider other
0.6407) on the models’ predictions. This made LD5 the most
methods in the dimensionality reduction technique that would
significant feature in contributing towards predictions. It
be a better alternative to PCA, and also look at more advanced
implies that LD5 captures a vital aspect of the data which
ensemble techniques in an effort to make better the accuracy
holds a strong relationship with the class labels.
of breathprint identification using machine learning
techniques.
In the contrary, ‘LD3’ has the greatest negative impact (-
0.7197). This may indicate that the discriminant component ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
holds features which are negatively correlated towards the
I would like to thank Dr. Omar Nibouche, my project
classification outcome. The data possessing both strongly
supervisor, for his guidance and support throughout the
positive and negative coefficients demonstrates the
entirety of this project.
complexity of the dataset, with certain features contributing
positively and others negatively. REFERENCES
It can be assumed that the model relied on a balance
[1] Pauling, L., Robinson, A. B., Teranishit, R., & Cary, P.
of features that had positive and negative impacts. This
(1971). Quantitative Analysis of Urine Vapor and Breath by
reinstates the importance of the dataset possessing a diverse
Gas-Liquid Partition Chromatography (orthomolecular
set of discriminants. However, as the majority of the
medicine/vitamins/controlled diet) (Vol. 68, Issue 10).
discriminant component values were relatively small, it
https://www.pnas.org
shows that no single feature dominated the classification task.
[2] Martinez-Lozano Sinues, P., Kohler, M., & Zenobi, R.
This reinforces the need for an effective combination of
(2013). Human Breath Analysis May Support the Existence
features.
of Individual Metabolic Phenotypes. PLoS ONE, 8(4).
Comparing both iterations shows that some of the
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059909
adjustments to the methodology led to improvements
[3] Kaloumenou, M., Skotadis, E., Lagopati, N.,
(especially with the Logistic Regression model), but the
Efstathopoulos, E., & Tsoukalas, D. (2022). Breath Analysis:
overall performance of all 3 models in both iterations
A Promising Tool for Disease Diagnosis—The Role of
remained modest. The key point to recognize here is that the
Sensors. In Sensors (Vol. 22, Issue 3). MDPI.
order in which the dimensionality reduction and feature
https://doi.org/10.3390/s22031238
selection techniques are performed can greatly impact model
[4] Peled, N., Fuchs, V., Kestenbaum, E. H., Oscar, E., &
performance.
Bitran, R. (2021). An update on the use of exhaled breath
Future work should focus on further refining these
analysis for the early detection of lung cancer. In Lung
techniques by exploring alternative or additional techniques
Cancer: Targets and Therapy (Vol. 12, pp. 81–92). Dove
to implement. More sophisticated regularisation techniques
Medical Press Ltd. https://doi.org/10.2147/LCTT.S320493
could be employed alongside non-linear dimensionality
[5] Peled, N., Fuchs, V., Kestenbaum, E. H., Oscar, E., &
reduction processes like t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbour
Bitran, R. (2021). An update on the use of exhaled breath
Embedding (t-SNE) or Uniform Manifold Approximation
analysis for the early detection of lung cancer. In Lung
and Projection (UMAP).
Cancer: Targets and Therapy (Vol. 12, pp. 81–92). Dove
Given the variability in model performance, further
Medical Press Ltd. https://doi.org/10.2147/LCTT.S320493
analysis could look into ensemble methods that combine the
[6] Das, S., Pal, S., & Mitra, M. (2016). Significance of
strength of multiple models to achieve more robust
Exhaled Breath Test in Clinical Diagnosis: A Special Focus
predictions.
on the Detection of Diabetes Mellitus. In Journal of Medical
The analysis of feature importance reinforces the
and Biological Engineering (Vol. 36, Issue 5, pp. 605–624).
need to delve into specific characteristics of breathprint data,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40846-
that contributes the most to classification.
016-0164-6
[7] Issitt, T., Wiggins, L., Veysey, M., Sweeney, S. T.,
Brackenbury, W. J., & Redeker, K. (2022). Volatile
compounds in human breath: Critical review and meta- for Machine Learning-Based Disease Risk
analysis. In Journal of Breath Research (Vol. 16, Issue 2). Prediction,” Frontiers in Bioinformatics, vol. 2, Jun. 2022,
IOP Publishing Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1088/1752- doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fbinf.2022.927312.
7163/ac5230 [20] A. Biswal, “Principal Component Analysis in Machine
[8] Ibrahim, W., Natarajan, S., Wilde, M., Cordell, R., Learning | Simplilearn,” Simplilearn.com, Apr. 24, 2023.
Monks, P. S., Greening, N., Brightling, C. E., Evans, R., & https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/machine-learning-
Siddiqui, S. (2021). A systematic review of the diagnostic tutorial/principal-component-analysis
accuracy of volatile organic compounds in airway diseases [21] Raman, “ML | Linear Discriminant
and their relation to markers of type-2 inflammation. ERJ Analysis,” GeeksforGeeks, May 03, 2019.
Open Research, 7(3). https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ml-linear-discriminant-
https://doi.org/10.1183/23120541.00030-2021 analysis/
[9] Lee, B., Lee, J., Lee, J. O., Hwang, Y., Bahn, H. K., Park, [22] Hesamian, G., Johannssen, A., & Chukhrova, N.
I., Jheon, S., & Lee, D. S. (2024). Breath analysis system with (2024). An explainable fused lasso regression model for
convolutional neural network (CNN) for early detection of handling high-dimensional fuzzy data. Journal of
lung cancer. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 409. Computational and Applied Mathematics, 441.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2024.135578 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.2023.115721
[9] Moura, P. C., Raposo, M., & Vassilenko, V. (2023). [23] Nakatsu, Robbie T.. "Validation of machine learning
Breath volatile organic compounds (VOCs) as biomarkers for ridge regression models using Monte Carlo, bootstrap, and
the diagnosis of pathological conditions: A review. In variations in cross-validation" Journal of Intelligent
Biomedical Journal (Vol. 46, Issue 4). Elsevier B.V. Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, 2023, pp. 20220224.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bj.2023.100623 https://doi.org/10.1515/jisys-2022-0224
[10] Singh, C. (2023). Machine Learning in Pattern [24] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine
Recognition. European Journal of Engineering and Learning. 2023.
Technology Research, 8(2), 63–68. [25] J. Kenneth Tay, B. Narasimhan, and T. Hastie, “Elastic
https://doi.org/10.24018/ejeng.2023.8.2.3025 Net Regularization Paths for All Generalized Linear
[11] Karunanethy, M., Tripathi, R., Panchagnula, M. v., & Models,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 106, no. 1,
Rengaswamy, R. (2024). User authentication system based Jan. 2023, doi: https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v106.i01.
on human exhaled breath physics. PLoS ONE, 19(4 April). [26] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial intelligence : a
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0301971 modern approach. London: Pearson, 2021.
[12] Li, W., Xu, J., Yang, W., Liu, F., Zhou, H., & Yan, Z. [27] P. A. Flach, Machine learning : the art and science of
(2024). Approach and application of extracting matching algorithms that make sense of data. Cambridge: Cambridge
features from E-nose signals for AI tasks. Biomedical Signal University Press, 2012.
Processing and Control, 90. [28] S. Raschka and V. Mirjalili, Python machine learning :
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2023.105869 machine learning and deep learning with python, scikit-
[13] Pegoraro, J. A., Lavault, S., Wattiez, N., Similowski, T., learn, and tensorflow 2. Birmingham: Packt Publishing,
Gonzalez-Bermejo, J., & Birmelé, E. (2021). Machine- Limited, 2019.
learning based feature selection for a non-invasive breathing [29] Y. Gupta, “Lasso Regression — In ‘Simple’
change detection. BioData Mining, 14(1). English,” Data Science Simplified, Sep. 29, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13040-021-00265-8 https://medium.com/dssimplified/lasso-regression-in-
[14] Suresh, K. C., Prabha, R., Hemavathy, N., Sivarajeswari, simple-english-8558e354781c
S., Gokulakrishnan, D., & Jagadeesh kumar, M. (2022). A [30] K. Kargın, “Ridge Regression Fundamentals and
Machine Learning Approach for Human Breath Diagnosis Modeling in Python,” Medium, Apr. 17, 2021.
with Soft Sensors. Computers and Electrical Engineering, https://keremkargin.medium.com/ridge-regression-
100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.107945 fundamentals-and-modeling-in-python-bb56f4301f62
[15] de Vincentis, A., Pennazza, G., Santonico, M., [31] Arun Addagatla, “Regularization Techniques in
Vespasiani-Gentilucci, U., Galati, G., Gallo, P., Vernile, C., Machine Learning - Arun Addagatla - Medium,” Medium,
Pedone, C., Antonelli Incalzi, R., & Picardi, A. (2016). Apr. 20, 2021.
Breath-print analysis by e-nose for classifying and https://arunaddagatla.medium.com/regularization-
monitoring chronic liver disease: A proof-of-concept study. techniques-bbc0abfc5fe (accessed Aug. 25, 2024).
Scientific Reports, 6. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep25337
[16] IBM, “What is Overfitting? | IBM,” www.ibm.com,
2024. https://www.ibm.com/topics/overfitting
[17] Fi, M. O., & Garriga, G. C. (2010). Permutation Tests
for Studying Classifier Performance Markus Ojala. In
Journal of Machine Learning Research (Vol. 11).
[18] “Bias and Variance in Machine Learning: An In Depth
Explanation,” Simplilearn.com.
Make sure to remove all placeholder and explanatory
https://www.simplilearn.com/tutorials/machine-learning-
text from the template when you add your own text.
tutorial/bias-and-variance
This text should not be here in
[19] N. Pudjihartono, T. Fadason, A. W. Kempa-Liehr, and
J. M. O’Sullivan, “A Review of Feature Selection Methods
